Cryptographic algorithms come in a variety of flavors. Some are strong (meaning difficult to crack)
but make substantial demands to processing power and key management. Others are weak (meaning
easier to crack) but generally less demanding and therefore better suited for some applications. All
strong cryptography requires true random numbers to generate keys, but how many depends on
the encryption scheme. The strongest possible method, One Time Pad (OTP for short) encryption,
is the most demanding of all; it requires as many random bits as there are bits of information to
be encrypted.
True random numbers are typically generated by sampling and processing a source of entropy
outside the computer. A source of entropy can be very simple, like the little variations in somebody’s
mouse movements or in the amount of time between keystrokes. In practice, however, it can be
tricky to use user input as a source of entropy. Keystrokes, for example, are often buffered by the
computer’s operating system, meaning that several keystrokes are collected before they are sent to
the program waiting for them. To the program, it will seem as though the keys were pressed almost
simultaneously.
A really good source of entropy is a radioactive source. The points in time at which a radioactive
source decays are completely unpredictable, and can be sampled and fed into a computer, avoiding
any buffering mechanisms in the operating system. In fact, this is what the HotBits people at
Fourmilab in Switzerland are doing. Another source of entropy could be atmospheric noise from a
radio, like that used here at random.org, or even just background noise from an office or laboratory.
The lavarand people at Silicon Graphics have been clever enough to use lava lamps to generate
random numbers, so their entropy source not only gives them entropy, it also looks good! The
latest random number generator to come online (both lavarand and HotBits precede random.org)
is Damon Hart-Davis’ Java EntropyPool which gathers random bits from a variety of sources
including